1!

The Seven Outer Introductions from the Twenty-One Introductions of the Great
Perfection Essence of the Profound Meaning of Ati

I, Padma Thötreng, Paṇḍita Vimalamitra and the Translator Vairocana, we three
condensed into one the three kinds of Heart Essences that are the ultimate experience of
the transcendent state and set it down into writing for future generations. May it meet
with a fortunate one.
Here, in the explanation of the twenty-one introductions of the critical points of the
intimate instructions, there are seven introductions that are based on rays, seven
introductions based on a mirror, and seven introductions of the three doors.
First: in the seven outer introductions based on rays, face towards the sun in the
morning and the late afternoon, and without looking at the disc of the sun, close one eye,
squint [the other], and look at the sun’s rays. Guide one’s gaze to the left of the sun and
meditate. At that time, rainbow light manifests like a row of dazzling beams, and above
that, vidyā is perceived to arise as five vajra chains. Furthermore, though the lights of the
basis exist vividly, the chains are coiled and unstable. There is nothing to negate or
establish with respect to that. Practice the vidyā that maintains its own place. If it remains
stable for a while, one has reached the measure.
Second: as before, since one faces the sun (surya) to guide the rays of the sun, because
one gazes at [the rays] with squinted eyes, one sees a round house of light of various
colors, above which one sees the vajra chains. Focus on this as before and meditate.

Puri Copy

2!

Third: raise one’s arm and gaze in the direction of the sun. In the hairs of the arm, one
sees iridescent round bindus of five colors. Gaze at them and meditate.
Fourth: cover one’s eyes with purple gauze and gaze. One will see iridescent luminous
bindus that are like pressed seed oil and chains. Also meditate upon those.
Fifth: if one gazes in the direction of the sun, squinting through the fingers of the hand,
one will see as above and one should meditate on that.
Sixth: at night, gaze obliquely at the rays of the moon and meditate on those.
Seventh: at night, also gaze at the rays of a butter lamp, and as before, meditate.
In all of those, the appearances as lights, bindus, and chains are not established as
independently existing externally. Though [the lights, binds and chains] arise in that way,
externally to the right and the left, through the condition of the radiant light which exists
in one’s heart center, one should meditate upon them without distraction in a state of not
grasping onto them.
This is impressed with the seal of extreme secrecy. The seven outer introductions,
samaya. Sealed, sealed, sealed.
This teaching is protected by the protectress of mantra! Samaya. Sealed, sealed, sealed.
This was revealed by Rigdzin Gyurme Dorje from the Sky Metal Cliff of Jingdah in the fire dragon year.
After thirty-three human years had passed, during the earth bird year, the heir, Pema Gyurme Gyatso1 put
this down in writing in a book. Virtue. Virtue. Virtue.

1

1686-1718, son of Terdag Lingpa, second throne-holder of Mindroling.

Puri Copy

3!

The Seven Inner Introductions of the Profound Meaning of Ati.

I, Padma Thötreng, Paṇḍita Vimalamitra and the Translator Vairocana, we three
condensed into one the three kinds of Heart Essences that are the ultimate experience of
the transcendent state and set it down into writing for future generations. May it meet
with a fortunate one.
Second, there are seven introductions based on a mirror in the stages of the introduction
of the critical points of the intimate instructions.
First: display a bindu of five lights in a bronze mirror that is shiny and polished. In this
way, [it is a symbol that] the five lights that are clear and distinct are the basis existing in
one’s heart center. By practicing a path based on this, the entire universe arises like a
pavilion of brocade.
Second: display a figure of the victor in a mirror. By practicing this, it is a symbol of
the solitary forms of the five victors arising at the culmination of the increase of
experience.
Third: display in a mirror the figure of a samboghakāya couple in union along with
their retinue. Those who make effort in practicing this reach the full measure of vidyā.
This is the symbol of seeing the cluster of the five families inside of the luminous circle
of the bindu.
Fourth: display a crystal. The emanation of Vajrasattva is the Vajrasattva mirror. It selforiginates from the blessings of the Victor himself in the countries of the world of the

Puri Copy

4!

four continents and naturally exists there. Since this crystal also corresponds with the
experience and realization of yogis, it is a symbol of the essence which exists without
obscuration like a pure emptiness, the clarity and emptiness of one’s mind that is devoid
of grasping.
Since the nature is an unimpeded diversity and can arise as anything at all, this crystal
also illustrates the colors of the multicolored light that are displayed in different colors,
shapes, and forms.
The compassion that exists as an inner clarity can be seen with squinted eyes as five
lights that are distinct and bright. This crystal symbolizes the vidyā that exists in the form
of five lights in the middle of the heart center.
These cannot be symbolized by anything other than a pure crystal. It symbolizes
unmistakably seeing the true meaning.
Fifth: hold a crystal in a sun ray. From the pure and brilliant nature of the crystal, a
flash of multicolored light is produced. This symbolizes that the flashing mind of the
yogin arises as many deluded concepts of subject and object based on the various
appearances of external objects. Since the five lights exist within the crystal, these five
distinct lights that manifest from the potentiality of that crystal are a symbol of the vajra
chains appearing externally as five lights arising from the five lights of the pristine
consciousness of vidyā that exist inwardly in the middle of the heart center.
Sixth: ignite many butter lamps and place them on a flat surface. Since one gazes at
them through the crystal, they appear in two levels, an upper level and a lower level. This

Puri Copy

5!

is the meaning of the lights appearing as the mother and the child, or appearing as a
diversity.
Seventh: seated on a high and beautiful throne, that has a brilliant seat, supple cushions,
and a backdrop, the guru is adorned with a crown ornaments and so on. The disciples
gaze westward in the morning and eastward in the late afternoon. They focus their eyes
on the crystal and offer supplications. Next, since they look into the space of the tip of the
crystal, the image of the guru manifests and is seen within a circle of five distinct lights.
This is a symbol of meeting with the sambhogakāya guru.
These are the introductions with the two kinds of mirrors. This is impressed with the
seal of extreme secrecy. Samaya. Sealed, sealed, sealed.
This was revealed by Rigzin Gyurme Dorje from the Milky White Cliffs of Jingdah. Auspicious.

Puri Copy

6!

The Seven Secret Introductions of the Profound Meaning of Ati

Third, the seven secret introductions of the three doors.
First: place a lamp inside of the human head made of clay with complete sense organs.
Enclose it with a cloth in the dark as if it were nighttime. Make one large opening in the
crown. The introduction given by the attending disciple or the master is given in the
following way. First, explain the Dharma of death and impermanence in order to arouse
thoughts of regret in the disciples. Then, say:
“This is Nima Gonpo who lived in his homeland on the border of Nepal and Tibet. He
was young and in good health. He had reached maturity. All of his relatives, retinue,
father, mother, and household increased. Whoever was with him was delighted. He ate
delicious food, sipped delicious drinks, and wore warm and soft clothes. His enjoyments,
wealth, and property were inexhaustible. He was skilled in business. There was no
worldly method he did not know. He was very brave. His replies and explanations were
precise. He was literate. He had many friends and much wealth. He tamed outer enemies.
He guarded the realm. In everything, he had only a single aspiration.
After some time, he was struck with a strong fatal illness. At that time, even through he
was given good medicine by a life-giving physician, it was of no benefit. The divination
performed by Mamo Nansri Kunthong was of no benefit. The rituals done by A Bon
Shenrab Yungdrung offered no improvement. The blessing done by Ngakpa Khrogyal
Dudjom was of no benefit. The pain was not relieved by the Bon rites of threadcross

Puri Copy

7!

tormas. The rites of ten thousand monks did not reverse the condition. Even the nine
positivities of having a father, a mother, a wife, a son, a daughter, brothers, sisters,
relatives, and a retinue had no effect. Even though his wealth, possessions, horses, and
cattle were inexhaustible, once all the appearances of nondeceptive coarse outer objects
dissolved, everything became pitch dark. Inwardly, the doors of the sense organs ceased.
The sense organ of the eyes which see beautiful and ugly form ceased. The sense organ of
the ears which hear pleasant and unpleasant sound ceased. The sense organ of the nose
which separates pleasant and unpleasant odors ceased. The outer breath stopped outside.
The inner breath vanished inside. This essence of knowing awareness, which is like the
butter lamp inside [the head], abides clearly and stably as the five naturally perfected
lights. This is the so-called ‘the youthful vase body.’”
At this occasion, remain briefly in equipoise.
“This example applies to each of us sentient beings. At that time, the only thing that
carries benefit is our present practice. Be diligent!”
Furthermore, the example of vidyā in the heart center appearing outwardly is this lamp
illuminating the sky above [the clay head]. Next, display the lamp outside. This is the
occasion of the universe being seen as kāyas and lights. It is the example of luminosity
arising because consciousness departed outside of the body.
Second: “You should rest in the state of the dharmatā of your mind,” and press on the
[carotid] artery. After waking up or after the various deluded concepts arise once again
after dissolving into the original luminosity of the true dharmatā, one either arrives or has
not arrived at the full measure of maintaining vidyā in its own place.

Puri Copy

8!

Third: pressing the eyes with the the index fingers displays the arising of the circle of
light. This is a sign that the five lights (which are seen because of conditions) exist in the
heart center and exist inseparably within oneself.
Fourth: display the light of the mirror and the light that arises from the sun. These are
the bright and dull lights and so on of the bardo, the sight of which cannot be endured by
the eyes. [The light of the bardo] should be understood to be the potentiality of true
dharmatā.
Fifth: since one closes the ears with the palms, a roaring sound arises. In the bardo, the
intrinsic sound of dharmatā arises like the roar of a thousands rolls of thunder. Nothing
arises other than that. This is a sign of that sound existing as an innate attribute within
oneself even now.
Sixth: hold up an image of Vajradhātu. Focus the eye on the crystal and demonstrate
what arises in the space [of the crystal]. This is the symbol of seeing the self-appearance
of the peaceful deities in the bardo.
Seventh: display the assembled deities of wrathful herukas as before. This is the sign of
seeing the assembled deities of wrathful herukas in the bardo.
At this occasion, if one wishes to elaborate, one should display the messengers, the rays
of the mirror, and the light of the crystals. Here, various kinds of music are played and
the extensive introduction of the arising of the bardo is performed.
As such, this introduction through example, meaning, and signs should generate
confidence in people.

Puri Copy

9!

Give an extensive explanation such as, “Oh, you fortunate children of good families
must comprehend the meaning of the twenty introductions which have one eye and
practice! Meditate these topics using the sun rays in the daytime and practice! There is no
doubt you will be liberated by this!,” and so on.
The unbroken instruction from Vidyādhara Garab Dorje and so on is the profound
essence of the three vidyādharas. The twenty-one introductions is a section of the Heart
Essence of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities. Samaya. Sealed, sealed, sealed.
At the very end of the age of degeneration,
may the karmically destined one called Drodul Lingpa
arise as the great fortune of migrating beings
and meet with those fortune ones.
Since he will have two or three lineage holders,
there is no doubt this [instruction] will spread widely.
A proper recipient whose samaya cannot be defeated is rare.
Even if they have not been predicted,
the one who hears this and has diligent faith is embraced by the
prediction.
If this is practiced, they shall attain the vidyādhara stage.
Samaya. Sealed, sealed, sealed.
This was revealed by Rigdzin Gyurme Dorje from the Sky Metal Cliff of Jingdah in the fire dragon year.
After thirty-three human years had passed, during the earth bird year, the disciple, Lochen Dharmaśrī, set it
down in a book. May good fortune spread through all the world! Sarvamaṇgalaṃ.
© 2015 Copyright Zangthal Editions All Rights Reserved. Translated by Malcolm Smith

Puri Copy

